Hello there! In this video, we are going to talk about asynchronous programming
Operations can be performed synchronously or asynchronously. When they are synchronous,
this means that when we start an operation, we wait until it finishes before we start the next one.
When we are doing asynchronous operations,
it means we can start another one straight away.
We do not need to wait for the first one to complete.
As an analogy, you can think of a synchronous operation as being like buying things in a shop.
If something goes wrong with your computer and you need a new part, then you go to the shop, you wait
to be served, you ask for the part, you agree to buy it, you pay for it.
Then you come home and then you can plug in the new part and use your computer. With an asynchronous
operation,
you would do some clicks, then you would go away and do something else which does not involve your computer
(if there is such a thing!)
And then some time later on, the part will arrive and then you can plug
it into your computer.
So you can go in and do other things without waiting for the computer parts to arrive.
In synchronous programming, if we start a new task to do some work, then our current task will
have to stop and wait until the new task completes.
For example, we could do some work, then request data from the database, so we start a new task which
will fetch the data.
Then we wait for the data.
Then this task will complete and then we get the data and then we can continue with the next stage in
our program.
An example of a synchronous task is a normal C++ function call. For example, if we call a member
function to save some data in a file, we stop and wait until the function returns.
And then we execute
the next operation in the program.
We have to stop and wait for this to complete, even if we go on to do something that does not actually
rely on the data being saved.
So this time that we stop and wait for the data is "dead" time really, and this reduces the throughput
of the program.
If we have a GUI application, then the program will not be able to process user events and the program
will appear unresponsive.
If we are writing a server application, clients will notice that the website is getting slow or they
may even not be able to connect.
When we start a task asynchronously, it will continue to run in the background while we can carry on
doing our current task.
So in the database example, we would start a new task which requests the data. Then we would carry on in the
current task and do some more work.
And then at some point we would get the data from the database.
And we can carry on doing work in our
original task so long as we do not actually need the data.
So we can process GUI events, handle client
connections and so on.
When we get to the point where we really cannot manage without it, we have to stop and wait.
So if we ordered our computer parts online and this has not arrived yet, we just have to sit in front
of our computer and wait for it.
On the other hand, if the data is already available, we can continue without stopping.
If the part has arrived, we can just plug it in and carry on.
As an example of an asynchronous task, we could save the data to file asynchronously.
And then we can carry on executing instructions in our own task while the disks are spinning around.
At some point, we may need to check whether the asynchronous operation is completed or we may need
to get some results from it.
When we are writing threaded programs, we try to avoid blocking (when the thread has to stop and wait).
This reduces the throughput and responsiveness of the thread which is being blocked.
And also any threads which are joined on that thread are also going to be blocked.
Blocking in a critical section is particularly bad.
Any other threads which wants to execute that critical section are going to be blocked as well.
And if we are using locks to protect the critical section, then there is the risk of deadlock.
If we use asynchronous programming techniques, we can reduce the need for threads to block.
We cannot actually avoid it completely.
It may be that the asynchronous operation does not complete in time, so we have to stop and wait for
it.
But even in that case, we can at least get some work done instead of just sitting there and idly waiting.
When we have operations that block, they are synchronized by mutexes or operations on atomic
variables.
A thread will remain blocked until another thread unlocks the mutex that it is waiting for,
or completes an
operation on an atomic variable that it wants to access. When we have non-blocking operations,
these are synchronized by message queues.
The threads will push a message onto a queue.
This is a concurrency queue, so
it is thread-safe.
Each of these messages is processed as it comes off the queue.
Then the threads which pushed the messages will continue running without waiting.
So, in effect, each thread is sending an order to Amazon and Amazon is processing the orders as they
come in.
This is often implemented by using messages which consist of callable objects,
and the message processing
involves invoking that callable object as a thread.
Unfortunately, writing a safe and efficient concurrent queue with multiple consumers and producers
is very difficult.
C++ does not have one yet.
It is not going to be in C++ 20,
unfortunately.
There are implementations in various libraries, including Boost, Microsoft's parallel
processing library and Intel's thread building blocks.
We are also going to have a go at writing one later in this course, although it will be a bit simpler.
Finally, we can also use asynchronous programming techniques for parallel operations.
For example,
computations involving large arrays or matrixes.
So we start some new threads which all perform the same task, but give them different parts of the
data to operate on.
Then when each thread completes the task, we collect its results and then we go through and combine
all these partial results to get the final answer.
One other point: asynchronous programming is not thread specific.
There are asynchronous programming techniques
which can be used in single-threaded programs.
Even in old MS-DOS you could print something out in the background,
but that is getting away from
threads really.
OK, so that's all for this video.
I'll see you next time.
But meanwhile, keep coding!